other small sprouts on his planet. 

It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab. The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to 
get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge 
bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was 
not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She 



chose her colours with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to 
go out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her 
beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious 
adornment lasted for days and days. Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed 
herself. And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said: ÿAh! I am 
scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged...ÿ But the little 
prince could not restrain his admiration: 

ÿOh! How beautiful you are!ÿ 

ÿAm I not?ÿ the flower responded, sweetly. ÿAnd I was born at the same moment as the sun...ÿ 

The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest, but how moving, and 
exciting she was! 

ÿI think it is time for breakfast,ÿ she added an instant later. ÿIf you would have the kindness to 
think of my needsÿ And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling can of 
fresh water. 

So, he tended the flower. So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity, which 
was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. 

One day, for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince: ÿLet 
the tigers come with their claws!ÿ 

ÿThere are no tigers on my planet,ÿ the little prince objected. ÿAnd, anyway, tigers do not eat 
weeds.ÿ 

ÿI am not a weed,ÿ the flower replied, sweetly. ÿPlease excuse me...ÿ ÿI am not at all afraid of 
tigers,ÿ she went on, ÿbut I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldnÿt screen for me?" 

ÿA horror of drafts, that is bad luck, for a plant,ÿ remarked the little prince, and added to himself, 
ÿThis flower is a very complex creature...ÿ 

ÿAt night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I 
came from...ÿ But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She 
could not have known anything of any other worlds. 

Embarrassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such an untruth, she coughed two 
or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong. 

ÿThe screen?ÿ 

ÿI was just going to look for it when you spoke to me...ÿ 

Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same. So 
the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love, had soon come to 
doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance, and it made him very 
unhappy. 

ÿI ought not to have listened to her,ÿ he confided to me one day. 

ÿOne never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their 




fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. 
This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with tenderness 
and pity.ÿ 

And he continued his confidences: ÿThe fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I 
ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over 
me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay 
behind her poor little stratagems. Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to 
love her...ÿ 

I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the 
morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active 
volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his 
breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, ÿOne never 
knows!ÿ So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn 
slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney. 

On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring 
no end of trouble upon us. The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the 
last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last 
morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for 
the last time, and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realised that he 
was very close to tears. ÿGoodbye,ÿ he said to the flower. But she made no answer. ÿGoodbye,ÿ 
he said again. The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold. 

ÿI have been silly,ÿ she said to him, at last. ÿI ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy...ÿ He was 
surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held 
arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness. 

ÿOf course I love you,ÿ the flower said to him. ÿIt is my fault that you have not known it all the 
while. That is of no importance. But you, you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let 
the glass globe be. I donÿt want it any more.ÿ 

ÿBut the wind...ÿ ÿMy cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a 
flower.ÿ 

ÿBut the animals...ÿ ÿWell, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to 
become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the 
butterflies and the caterpillars who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large 
animals, I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws.ÿ 

And, naively, she showed her four thorns. 

Then she added: ÿDonÿt linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!ÿ 

For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower... 



He found himself in the neighbourhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He 
began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his knowledge. The first of them was 
inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he was seated upon a throne, which was at 




the same time both simple and majestic. 



ÿAh! Here is a subject,ÿ exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince coming. And the little 
prince asked himself: ÿHow could he recognise me when he had never seen me before?ÿ 

He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are subjects. ÿApproach, 
so that I may see you better,ÿ said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king 
over somebody. 

The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed 
and obstructed by the kingÿs magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since 
he was tired, he yawned. 

ÿIt is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king,ÿ the monarch said to him. ÿI forbid 
you to do so.ÿ 

ÿI canÿt help it. I canÿt stop myself,ÿ replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. 

ÿI have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep...ÿ 

ÿAh, then,ÿ the king said. ÿI order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. 
Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn again! It is an order.ÿ 

ÿThat frightens me... I cannot, any more...ÿ murmured the little prince, now completely abashed. 

ÿHum! Hum!ÿ replied the king. ÿThen I... I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes toÿ He 
sputtered a little, and seemed vexed. For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his 
authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But, 
because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable. 

ÿIf I ordered a general,ÿ he would say, by way of example, ÿif I ordered a general to change 
himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the 
general. It would be my fault.ÿ 

ÿMay I sit down?ÿ came now a timid inquiry from the little prince. ÿI order you to do so,ÿ the king 
answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle. But the little prince was 
wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule? 

ÿSire,ÿ he said to him, ÿI beg that you will excuse my asking you a questionÿ 

ÿI order you to ask me a question,ÿ the king hastened to assure him. ÿSire, over what do you 
rule?ÿ ÿOver everything,ÿ said the king, with magnificent simplicity. 

ÿOver everything?ÿ The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all 
the stars. ÿOver all that?ÿ asked the little prince. ÿOver all that,ÿ the king answered. For his rule 
was not only absolute: it was also universal. ÿAnd the stars obey you?ÿ ÿCertainly they do,ÿ the 
king said. ÿThey obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination.ÿ 

Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete 
authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but 
seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred times, with out ever having to move his 
chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet, which he had forsaken, he 
plucked up his courage to ask the king a favour: 





ÿI should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set...ÿ 

ÿIf I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to write a tragic 
drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he 
had received, which one of us would be in the wrong?ÿ the king demanded. ÿThe general, or 
myself?ÿ 

ÿYou,ÿ said the little prince firmly. 

ÿExactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform,ÿ the king went 
on. ÿAccepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw 
themselves into the sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience 
because my orders are reasonable.ÿ 

ÿThen my sunset?ÿ the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had 
asked it. 

ÿYou shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science of government, I 
shall wait until conditions are favourable.ÿ 

ÿWhen will that be?ÿ inquired the little prince. ÿHum! Hum!ÿ replied the king; and before saying 
anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. ÿHum! Hum! That will be about... about... that will be 
this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed.ÿ 

The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he was already 
beginning to be a little bored. ÿI have nothing more to do here,ÿ he said to the king. ÿSo I shall set 
out on my way again.ÿ ÿDo not go,ÿ said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. ÿDo 
not go. I will make you a Minister!ÿ ÿMinister of what?ÿ ÿMinster of...of Justice!ÿ ÿBut there is 
nobody here to judge!ÿ ÿWe do not know that,ÿ the king said to him. ÿI have not yet made a 
complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me 
to walk.ÿ ÿOh, but I have looked already!ÿ said the little prince, turning around to give one more 
glance to the other side of the planet. 

On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all... ÿThen you shall judge yourself,ÿ the king 
answered, ÿthat is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to j udge oneself than to 
j udge others. If you succeed in j udging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true 
wisdom.ÿ 



ÿYes,ÿ said the little prince, ÿbut I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet. 
ÿHum! Hum!ÿ said the king. ÿI have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is 
an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him 
to death. Thus his life will depend on your j ustice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for 
he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have.ÿ 

ÿI,ÿ replied the little prince, ÿdo not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on 
my way.ÿ ÿNo,ÿ said the king. But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for 
departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch. ÿIf Your Majesty wishes to be promptly 
obeyed,ÿ he said, ÿhe should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for 
example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are 
favourable...ÿ As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. 

Then, with a sigh, he took his leave. ÿI made you my Ambassador,ÿ the king called out, hastily. 

He had a magnificent air of authority. 

ÿThe grown-ups are very strange,ÿ the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 
The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man. 










ÿAh! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!ÿ he exclaimed from afar, when he first 
saw the little prince coming. For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the little prince. ÿThat is a queer hat you are wearing.ÿ 

ÿIt is a hat for salutes,ÿ the conceited man replied. ÿIt is to raise in salute when people acclaim 
me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way.ÿ 

ÿYes?ÿ said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about. 

ÿClap your hands, one against the other,ÿ the conceited man now directed him. The little prince 
clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute. ÿThis is more entertaining 
than the visit to the king,ÿ the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, 
one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute. After five minutes of 



this exercise the little prince grew tired of the gameÿs monotony. ÿAnd what should one do to 
make the hat come down?ÿ he asked. But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people 
never hear anything but praise. 

ÿDo you really admire me very much?ÿ he demanded of the little prince. ÿWhat does that mean, 
ÿadmireÿ?ÿ 

ÿTo admire means that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the 
most intelligent man on this planet.ÿ ÿBut you are the only man on your planet!ÿ ÿDo me this 
kindness. Admire me just the same.ÿ 

ÿI admire you,ÿ said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, ÿbut what is there in that to 
interest you so much?ÿ 

And the little prince went away. ÿThe grown-ups are certainly very odd,ÿ he said to himself, as he 
continued on his journey. 

The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. 




This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection. ÿWhat are you 
doing there?ÿ he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of 
empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles. 

ÿI am drinking,ÿ replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air. 

ÿWhy are you drinking?ÿ demanded the little prince. 

ÿSo that I may forget,ÿ replied the tippler. ÿForget what?ÿ inquired the little prince, who already 
was sorry for him. 

ÿForget that I am ashamed,ÿ the tippler confessed, hanging his head. 

ÿAshamed of what?ÿ insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him. 

ÿAshamed of drinking!ÿ The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself up in an 
impregnable silence. 

And the little prince went away, puzzled. ÿThe grown-ups are certainly very, very odd,ÿ he said to 
himself, as he continued on his journey. 

The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. 

This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little princeÿs arrival. 



ÿGood morning,ÿ the little prince said to him. ÿYour cigarette has gone out.ÿ 



ÿThree and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good 
morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I havenÿt 
time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred- 
and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one.ÿ 

ÿFive hundred million what?ÿ asked the little prince. ÿEh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and- 
one million, I canÿt stop... I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I 
donÿt amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven...ÿ 

ÿFive-hundred-and-one million what?ÿ repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of 
a question once he had asked it. 

The businessman raised his head. ÿDuring the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I 
have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when some giddy 
goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over 
the place, and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was 
disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I donÿt get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The 
third time, well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millionsÿ 

ÿMillions of what?ÿ The businessman suddenly realised that there was no hope of being left in 
peace until he answered this question. 

ÿMillions of those little objects,ÿ he said, ÿwhich one sometimes sees in the sky.ÿ ÿFlies?ÿ ÿOh, 
no. Little glittering objects.ÿ ÿBees?ÿ ÿOh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle 
dreaming. As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle 
dreaming in my life.ÿ ÿAh! You mean the stars?ÿ ÿYes, thatÿs it. The stars.ÿ ÿAnd what do you do 
with five-hundred millions of stars?ÿ ÿFive-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two 
thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am 
accurate.ÿ 

ÿAnd what do you do with these stars?ÿ ÿWhat do I do with them?ÿ ÿYes.ÿ ÿNothing. I own them.ÿ 
ÿYou own the stars?ÿ ÿYes.ÿ ÿBut I have already seen a king who...ÿ ÿKings do not own, they 
reign over. It is a very different matter.ÿ 

ÿAnd what good does it do you to own the stars?ÿ ÿIt does me the good of making me rich.ÿ 

ÿAnd what good does it do you to be rich?ÿ 

ÿIt makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered.ÿ 

ÿThis man,ÿ the little prince said to himself, ÿreasons a little like my poor tippler...ÿ Nevertheless, 
he still had some more questions. ÿHow is it possible for one to own the stars?ÿ ÿTo whom do they 
belong?ÿ the businessman retorted, peevishly. ÿI donÿt know. To nobody.ÿ ÿThen they belong to 
me, because I was the first person to think of it.ÿ ÿIs that all that is necessary?ÿ ÿCertainly. 

When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you discover an island that 
belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on 
it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning 
them.ÿ 

ÿYes, that is true,ÿ said the little prince. ÿAnd what do you do with them?ÿ 




ÿI administer them,ÿ replied the businessman. ÿI count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I 
am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence.ÿ 

The little prince was still not satisfied. ÿIf I owned a silk scarf,ÿ he said, ÿI could put it around my 
neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with 
me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven...ÿ 

ÿNo. But I can put them in the bank.ÿ ÿWhatever does that mean?ÿ ÿThat means that I write the 
number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key.ÿ 

ÿAnd that is all?ÿ 

ÿThat is enough,ÿ said the businessman. 

ÿIt is entertaining,ÿ thought the little prince. ÿIt is rather poetic. But it is of no great 
consequence.ÿ On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas, which were very different 
from those of the grown-ups. 

ÿI myself own a flower,ÿ he continued his conversation with the businessman, ÿwhich I water 
every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is 
extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes, and it is of some use to my flower, 
that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars...ÿ 

The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer. And the little prince 
went away. ÿThe grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary,ÿ he said simply, talking to 
himself as he continued on his journey. 

The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just enough room on it for 
a street lamp and a lamplighter. 




The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a 
lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet, which had no people, and not one house. 

But he said to himself, nevertheless: ÿIt may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so 
absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work has 



some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one more star to life, or one 
flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful 
occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful.ÿ 

When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter. 

ÿGood morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?ÿ 

ÿThose are the orders,ÿ replied the lamplighter. ÿGood morning.ÿ 

ÿWhat are the orders?ÿ 

ÿThe orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening.ÿ And he lighted his lamp again. ÿBut why 
have you just lighted it again?ÿ 

ÿThose are the orders,ÿ replied the lamplighter. 

ÿI do not understand,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿThere is nothing to understand,ÿ said the lamplighter. ÿOrders are orders. Good morning.ÿ And 
he put out his lamp. 

Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares. 

ÿI follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp out in the morning, 
and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the 
night for sleep.ÿ 

ÿAnd the orders have been changed since that time?ÿ 

ÿThe orders have not been changed,ÿ said the lamplighter. ÿThat is the tragedy! From year to 
year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders have not been changed!ÿ 

ÿThen what?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿThen the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer have a single second 
for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!ÿ 

ÿThat is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!ÿ 

ÿIt is not funny at all!ÿ said the lamplighter. ÿWhile we have been talking together a month has 
gone by.ÿ 

ÿA month?ÿ 



ÿYes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening.ÿ And he lighted his lamp again. As the 
little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. 
He remembered the sunsets, which he himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling 
up his chair; and he wanted to help his friend. 

ÿYou know,ÿ he said, ÿI can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want to...ÿ 

ÿI always want to rest,ÿ said the lamplighter. For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at 
the same time. 




The little prince went on with his explanation: ÿYour planet is so small that three strides will take 
you all the way around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. 
When you want to rest, you will walk and the day will last as long as you like.ÿ 

ÿThat doesnÿt do me much good,ÿ said the lamplighter. ÿThe one thing I love in life is to sleep.ÿ 

ÿThen youÿre unlucky,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿI am unlucky,ÿ said the lamplighter. ÿGood morning.ÿ And he put out his lamp. 

ÿThat man,ÿ said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey, ÿthat man 
would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the 
businessman. Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. 
Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else besides himself.ÿ 

He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again: ÿThat man is the only one of them all 
whom I could have made my friend. But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for 
two people...ÿ What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to leave 
this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets! 

The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who 
wrote voluminous books. 




ÿOh, look! Here is an explorer!ÿ he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little prince coming. 

The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already travelled so much and 
so far! 

ÿWhere do you come from?ÿ the old gentleman said to him. 

ÿWhat is that big book?ÿ said the little prince. ÿWhat are you doing?ÿ 

ÿI am a geographer,ÿ the old gentleman said to him. 

ÿWhat is a geographer?ÿ asked the little prince. ÿA geographer is a scholar who knows the 
location of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts.ÿ 

ÿThat is very interesting,ÿ said the little prince. ÿHere at last is a man who has a real profession!ÿ 
And he cast a look around him at the planet of the geographer. 



It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever seen. 

ÿYour planet is very beautiful,ÿ he said. ÿHas it any oceans?ÿ 

ÿI couldnÿt tell you,ÿ said the geographer. 

ÿAh!ÿ The little prince was disappointed. ÿHas it any mountains?ÿ 

ÿI couldnÿt tell you,ÿ said the geographer. 

ÿAnd towns, and rivers, and deserts?ÿ 

ÿI couldnÿt tell you that, either.ÿ 

ÿBut you are a geographer!ÿ 

ÿExactly,ÿ the geographer said. ÿBut I am not an explorer. I havenÿt a single explorer on my 
planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the 
seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He 
does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and 
he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any one among them 
seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorerÿs moral character.ÿ 

ÿWhy is that?ÿ 

ÿBecause an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the geographer. So would 
an explorer who drank too much.ÿ 

ÿWhy is that?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿBecause intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down two mountains in a 
place where there was only one.ÿ 

ÿI know some one,ÿ said the little prince, ÿwho would make a bad explorer.ÿ 

ÿThat is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good, an inquiry 
is ordered into his discovery.ÿ 

ÿOne goes to see it?ÿ 

ÿNo. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs. For example, 
if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought 
back from it.ÿ The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement. ÿBut you come from far away! 
You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me!ÿ And, having opened his big register, 
the geographer sharpened his pencil. The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One 
waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink. ÿWell?ÿ said the 
geographer expectantly. 

ÿOh, where I live,ÿ said the little prince, ÿit is not very interesting. It is all so small. I have three 
volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows.ÿ 

ÿOne never knows,ÿ said the geographer. 



ÿI have also a flower.ÿ 




ÿWe do not record flowers,ÿ said the geographer. 

ÿWhy is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!ÿ 

ÿWe do not record them,ÿ said the geographer, ÿbecause they are ephemeral.ÿ 

ÿWhat does that mean ÿephemeralÿ?ÿ 

ÿGeographies,ÿ said the geographer, ÿare the books which, of all books, are most concerned with 
matters of consequence. They never become old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain 
changes its position. It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal 
things.ÿ 

ÿBut extinct volcanoes may come to life again,ÿ the little prince interrupted. 

ÿWhat does that mean ÿephemeralÿ?ÿ 

ÿWhether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us,ÿ said the geographer. 
ÿThe thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not change.ÿ 

ÿBut what does that mean ÿephemeralÿ?ÿ repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go 
of a question, once he had asked it. 

ÿIt means, ÿwhich is in danger of speedy disappearance.ÿ ÿ 

ÿIs my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?ÿ 

ÿCertainly it is.ÿ 

ÿMy flower is ephemeral,ÿ the little prince said to himself, ÿand she has only four thorns to 
defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my planet, all alone!ÿ 

That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more. ÿWhat place would you 
advise me to visit now?ÿ he asked. ÿThe planet Earth,ÿ replied the geographer. ÿIt has a good 
reputation.ÿ And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower. 




So then the seventh planet was the Earth. 

The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! 

One can count, there 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 
geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men, that is to say, 
about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups. 

To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention of electricity it 
was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511 
lamplighters for the street lamps. Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid 
spectacle. 

The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera. First would 
come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, 
these would go off to sleep. Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps 
in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the 
turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of 
South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order 
of their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent. 

Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his colleague who was 
responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole, only these two would live free from toil and 
care: they would be busy twice a year. 

When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth. 

I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the lamplighters. And I realise 
that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it. 

Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its 
surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public 
assembly, they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. 
All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet. 

The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They imagine that they fill 
a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs. You should advise 
them, then, to make their own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do 
not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence in me. 

When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people. He 
was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the colour of the 
moonlight, flashed across the sand. 

ÿGood evening,ÿ said the little prince courteously. 

ÿGood evening,ÿ said the snake. 

ÿWhat planet is this on which I have come down?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿThis is the Earth; this is Africa,ÿ the snake answered. 

ÿAh! Then there are no people on the Earth?ÿ 




ÿThis is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large,ÿ said the snake. 

The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky. 

ÿI wonder,ÿ he said, ÿwhether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us 
may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!ÿ 

ÿIt is beautiful,ÿ the snake said. ÿWhat has brought you here?ÿ 

ÿI have been having some trouble with a flower,ÿ said the little prince. ÿAh!ÿ said the snake. And 
they were both silent. 

ÿWhere are the men?ÿ the little prince at last took up the conversation again. ÿIt is a little lonely 
in the desert...ÿ 

ÿIt is also lonely among men,ÿ the snake said. The little prince gazed at him for a long time. 

ÿYou are a funny animal,ÿ he said at last. ÿYou are no thicker than a finger...ÿ 

ÿBut I am more powerful than the finger of a king,ÿ said the snake. 

The little prince smiled. ÿYou are not very powerful. You havenÿt even any feet. You cannot even 
travel...ÿ 

ÿI can carry you farther than any ship could take you,ÿ said the snake. He twined himself around 
the little princeÿs ankle, like a golden bracelet. 

ÿWhomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came,ÿ the snake spoke again. ÿBut 
you are innocent and true, and you come from a star...ÿ 

The little prince made no reply. ÿYou move me to pity, you are so weak on this Earth made of 
granite,ÿ the snake said. ÿI can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet. 
I can...ÿ 

ÿOh! I understand you very well,ÿ said the little prince. ÿBut why do you always speak in 
riddles?ÿ 

ÿI solve them all,ÿ said the snake. And they were both silent. 

The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. 

It was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the flower. 

ÿWhere are the men?ÿ the little prince asked, politely. The flower had once seen a caravan 
passing. 

ÿMen?ÿ she echoed. ÿI think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw them, several 
years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind blows them away. They have no 
roots, and that makes their life very difficult.ÿ 



ÿGoodbye,ÿ said the little prince. 




ÿGoodbye,ÿ said the flower. 



After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were 
the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. 

ÿFrom a mountain as high as this one,ÿ he said to himself, ÿI shall be able to see the whole planet 
at one glance, and all the people...ÿ But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened 
like needles. 




ÿGood morning,ÿ he said courteously. 

ÿGood morning...Good morning...Good morning,ÿ answered the echo. 

ÿWho are you?ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿWho are you...Who are you...Who are you?ÿ answered the echo. 

ÿBe my friends. I am all alone,ÿ he said. 

ÿI am all alone...all alone. ..all alone,ÿ answered the echo. 

ÿWhat a queer planet!ÿ he thought. ÿIt is altogether dry, and altogether pointed, and altogether 
harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination. They repeat whatever one says to 
them... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak...ÿ 

But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks, and snow, the little 
prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the abodes of men. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ he said. He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the roses. 

The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower. 

ÿWho are you?ÿ he demanded, thunderstruck. 

ÿWe are roses,ÿ the roses said. And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that 
she was the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them, all 
alike, in one single garden! 

ÿShe would be very much annoyed,ÿ he said to himself, ÿif she should see that... she would cough 



most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I 
should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life, for if I did not do that, to humble 
myself also, she would really allow herself to die...ÿ 

Then he went on with his reflections: ÿI thought that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all 
the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to 
my knees ÿ and one of them perhaps extinct forever... that doesnÿt make me a very great 
prince...ÿ And he lay down in the grass and cried. 

It was then that the fox appeared. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the fox. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw 
nothing. 

ÿI am right here,ÿ the voice said, ÿunder the apple tree.ÿ ÿ 

Who are you?ÿ asked the little prince, and added, ÿYou are very pretty to look at.ÿ 

ÿI am a fox,ÿ said the fox. 

ÿCome and play with me,ÿ proposed the little prince. 

ÿI am so unhappy.ÿ ÿI cannot play with you,ÿ the fox said. ÿI am not tamed.ÿ 

ÿAh! Please excuse me,ÿ said the little prince. But, after some thought, he added: ÿWhat does 
that mean, ÿtameÿ?ÿ 




ÿYou do not live here,ÿ said the fox. ÿWhat is it that you are looking for?ÿ 

ÿI am looking for men,ÿ said the little prince. ÿWhat does that mean, ÿtameÿ?ÿ 

ÿMen,ÿ said the fox. ÿThey have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise 
chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for chickens?ÿ 

ÿNo,ÿ said the little prince. ÿI am looking for friends. What does that mean, ÿtameÿ?ÿ 

ÿIt is an act too often neglected,ÿ said the fox. It means to establish ties.ÿ 



ÿÿTo establish tiesÿ?ÿ 



ÿJust that,ÿ said the fox. ÿTo me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a 
hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no 
need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you 
tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall 
be unique in all the world...ÿ 

ÿI am beginning to understand,ÿ said the little prince. ÿThere is a flower... I think that she has 
tamed me...ÿ 

ÿIt is possible,ÿ said the fox. ÿOn the Earth one sees all sorts of things.ÿ 

ÿOh, but this is not on the Earth!ÿ said the little prince. The fox seemed perplexed, and very 
curious. 

ÿOn another planet?ÿ 

ÿYes.ÿ 

ÿAre there hunters on this planet?ÿ 

ÿNo.ÿ 

ÿAh, that is interesting! Are there chickens?ÿ 

ÿNo.ÿ 

ÿNothing is perfect,ÿ sighed the fox. But he came back to his idea. ÿMy life is very monotonous,ÿ 
the fox said. ÿI hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are 
just alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun 
came to shine on my life. I shall know the sound of a step that will be different from all the others. 
Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of 
my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of 
no use to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that 
is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which 
is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the 
wheat...ÿ The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time. ÿPlease, tame me!ÿ he said. 

ÿI want to, very much,ÿ the little prince replied. ÿBut I have not much time. I have friends to 
discover, and a great many things to understand.ÿ 

ÿOne only understands the things that one tames,ÿ said the fox. ÿMen have no more time to 
understand anything. They buy things all ready-made at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere 
where one can buy friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame 
me...ÿ 

ÿWhat must I do, to tame you?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿYou must be very patient,ÿ replied the fox. ÿFirst you will sit down at a little distance from me, 
like that, in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. 
Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day...ÿ 




The next day the little prince came back. 



ÿIt would have been better to come back at the same hour,ÿ said the fox. ÿIf, for example, you 
come at four oÿclock in the afternoon, then at three oÿclock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel 
happier and happier as the hour advances. At four oÿclock, I shall already be worrying and 
jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never 
know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper rites...ÿ 

ÿWhat is a rite?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿThose also are actions too often neglected,ÿ said the fox. ÿThey are what make one day 
different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my 
hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! 
I can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day 
would be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all.ÿ 

So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near... 

ÿAh,ÿ said the fox, ÿI shall cry.ÿ 

ÿIt is your own fault,ÿ said the little prince. ÿI never wished you any sort of harm; but you wanted 
me to tame you...ÿ 

ÿYes, that is so,ÿ said the fox. 

ÿBut now you are going to cry!ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿYes, that is so,ÿ said the fox. 

ÿThen it has done you no good at all!ÿ 

ÿIt has done me good,ÿ said the fox, ÿbecause of the colour of the wheat fields.ÿ And then he 
added: ÿGo and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique in all the 
world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret.ÿ 

The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. ÿYou are not at all like my rose,ÿ he said. 
ÿAs yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox 
when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made 
him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world.ÿ And the roses were very much embarrassed. 
ÿYou are beautiful, but you are empty,ÿ he went on. ÿOne could not die for you. To be sure, an 
ordinary passer-by would think that my rose looked just like you, the rose that belongs to me. But 
in herself alone she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she 
that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that 
I have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars (except 
the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because it is she that I have listened to, 
when she grumbled, or boasted, or even sometimes when she said nothing. Because she is my 
rose. 

And he went back to meet the fox. ÿGoodbye,ÿ he said. 

ÿGoodbye,ÿ said the fox. ÿAnd now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the 
heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye.ÿ 




ÿWhat is essential is invisible to the eye,ÿ the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to 
remember. 

ÿIt is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important.ÿ 

ÿIt is the time I have wasted for my rose...ÿ said the little prince, so that he would be sure to 
remember. 

ÿMen have forgotten this truth,ÿ said the fox. ÿBut you must not forget it. You become 
responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible for your rose...ÿ 

ÿI am responsible for my rose,ÿ the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the railway switchman. 

ÿWhat do you do here?ÿ the little prince asked. 

ÿI sort out travellers, in bundles of a thousand,ÿ said the switchman. ÿI send off the trains that 
carry them; now to the right, now to the left.ÿ And a brilliantly lighted express train shook the 
switchmanÿs cabin as it rushed by with a roar like thunder. 

ÿThey are in a great hurry,ÿ said the little prince. ÿWhat are they looking for?ÿ 

ÿNot even the locomotive engineer knows that,ÿ said the switchman. And a second brilliantly 
lighted express thundered by, in the opposite direction. 

ÿAre they coming back already?ÿ demanded the little prince. ÿThese are not the same ones,ÿ said 
the switchman. ÿIt is an exchange.ÿ 

ÿWere they not satisfied where they were?ÿ asked the little prince. 

ÿNo one is ever satisfied where he is,ÿ said the switchman. And they heard the roaring thunder of 
a third brilliantly lighted express. 

ÿAre they pursuing the first travellers?ÿ demanded the little prince. 

ÿThey are pursuing nothing at all,ÿ said the switchman. ÿThey are asleep in there, or if they are 
not asleep they are yawning. Only the children are flattening their noses against the 
windowpanes.ÿ 

ÿOnly the children know what they are looking for,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿThey waste their time over a rag doll and it becomes very important to them; and if anybody 
takes it away from them, they cry...ÿ ÿThey are lucky,ÿ the switchman said. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the little prince. 

ÿGood morning,ÿ said the merchant. 

This was a merchant who sold pills that had been invented to quench thirst. You need only swallow 
one pill a week, and you would feel no need of anything to drink. 




ÿWhy are you selling those?ÿ asked the little prince. 



ÿBecause they save a tremendous amount of time,ÿ said the merchant. ÿComputations have been 
made by experts. With these pills, you save fifty-three minutes in every week.ÿ 

ÿAnd what do I do with those fifty-three minutes?ÿ 

ÿAnything you like...ÿ 

ÿAs for me,ÿ said the little prince to himself, ÿif I had fifty-three minutes to spend as I liked, I 
should walk at my leisure toward a spring of fresh water.ÿ 

It was now the eighth day since I had had my accident in the desert, and I had listened to the story 
of the merchant as I was drinking the last drop of my water supply. 

ÿAh,ÿ I said to the little prince, ÿthese memories of yours are very charming; but I have not yet 
succeeded in repairing my plane; I have nothing more to drink; and I, too, should be very happy if 
I could walk at my leisure toward a spring of fresh water!ÿ 

ÿMy friend the fox...ÿ the little prince said to me. 

ÿMy dear little man, this is no longer a matter that has anything to do with the fox!ÿ 

ÿWhy not?ÿ 

ÿBecause I am about to die of thirst...ÿ 

He did not follow my reasoning, and he answered me: ÿIt is a good thing to have had a friend, 
even if one is about to die. I, for instance, am very glad to have had a fox as a friend...ÿ 

ÿHe has no way of guessing the danger,ÿ I said to myself. ÿHe has never been either hungry or 
thirsty. A little sunshine is all he needs...ÿ 

But he looked at me steadily, and replied to my thought: ÿI am thirsty, too. Let us look for a 
well...ÿ I made a gesture of weariness. It is absurd to look for a well, at random, in the immensity 
of the desert. But nevertheless we started walking. 

When we had trudged along for several hours, in silence, the darkness fell, and the stars began to 
come out. Thirst had made me a little feverish, and I looked at them as if I were in a dream. The 
little princeÿs last words came reeling back into my memory: ÿThen you are thirsty, too?ÿ I 
demanded. But he did not reply to my question. He merely said to me: ÿWater may also be good 
for the heart...ÿ 

I did not understand this answer, but I said nothing. I knew very well that it was impossible to 
cross-examine him. He was tired. He sat down. I sat down beside him. And, after a little silence, 
he spoke again: ÿThe stars are beautiful, because of a flower that cannot be seen.ÿ 

I replied, ÿYes, that is so.ÿ And, without saying anything more, I looked across the ridges of sand 
that were stretched out before us in the moonlight. 

ÿThe desert is beautiful,ÿ the little prince added. 

And that was true. I have always loved the desert. One sits down on a desert sand dune, sees 





nothing, hears nothing. Yet through the silence something throbs, and gleams... 

ÿWhat makes the desert beautiful,ÿ said the little prince, ÿis that somewhere it hides a well...ÿ 

I was astonished by a sudden understanding of that mysterious radiation of the sands. When I was 
a little boy I lived in an old house, and legend told us that a treasure was buried there. To be sure, 
no one had ever known how to find it; perhaps no one had ever even looked for it. But it cast an 
enchantment over that house. My home was hiding a secret in the depths of its heart... ÿYes,ÿ I 
said to the little prince. ÿThe house, the stars, the desert ÿ what gives them their beauty is 
something that is invisible!ÿ 

ÿI am glad,ÿ he said, ÿthat you agree with my fox.ÿ As the little prince dropped off to sleep, I took 
him in my arms and set out walking once more. I felt deeply moved, and stirred. It seemed to me 
that I was carrying a very fragile treasure. It seemed to me, even, that there was nothing more 
fragile on all Earth. In the moonlight I looked at his pale forehead, his closed eyes, his locks of 
hair that trembled in the wind, and I said to myself: 

ÿWhat I see here is nothing but a shell. What is most important is invisible...ÿ 

As his lips opened slightly with the suspicious of a half-smile, I said to myself, again: ÿWhat 
moves me so deeply, about this little prince who is sleeping here, is his loyalty to a flower ÿ the 
image of a rose that shines through his whole being like the flame of a lamp, even when he is 
asleep...ÿ 

And I felt him to be more fragile still. I felt the need of protecting him, as if he himself were a 
flame that might be extinguished by a little puff of wind... And, as I walked on so, I found the well, 
at daybreak. 

ÿMen,ÿ said the little prince, ÿset out on their way in express trains, but they do not know what 
they are looking for. Then they rush about, and get excited, and turn round and round...ÿ And he 
added: ÿIt is not worth the trouble...ÿ 



The well that we had come to was not like the wells of the Sahara. The wells of the Sahara are 
mere holes dug in the sand. This one was like a well in a village. But there was no village here, 
and I thought I must be dreaming... 

ÿIt is strange,ÿ I said to the little prince. ÿEverything is ready for use: the pulley, the bucket, the 
rope...ÿ He laughed, touched the rope, and set the pulley to working. And the pulley moaned, like 
an old weathervane, which the wind has long since forgotten. 

ÿDo you hear?ÿ said the little prince. ÿWe have wakened the well, and it is singing...ÿ 

I did not want him to tire himself with the rope. 

ÿLeave it to me,ÿ I said. ÿIt is too heavy for you.ÿ I hoisted the bucket slowly to the edge of the 
well and set it there, happy, tired as I was, over my achievement. The song of the pulley was still 
in my ears, and I could see the sunlight shimmer in the still trembling water. 

ÿI am thirsty for this water,ÿ said the little prince. ÿGive me some of it to drink...ÿ 

And I understood what he had been looking for. I raised the bucket to his lips. He drank, his eyes 
closed. It was as sweet as some special festival treat. This water was indeed a different thing from 
ordinary nourishment. Its sweetness was born of the walk under the stars, the song of the pulley, 
the effort of my arms. It was good for the heart, like a present. When I was a little boy, the lights 
of the Christmas tree, the music of the Midnight Mass, the tenderness of smiling faces, used to 
make up, so, the radiance of the gifts I received. 

ÿThe men where you live,ÿ said the little prince, ÿraise five thousand roses in the same garden 
and they do not find in it what they are looking for.ÿ 

ÿThey do not find it,ÿ I replied. 

ÿAnd yet what they are looking for could be found in one single rose, or in a little water.ÿ 

ÿYes, that is true,ÿ I said. 

And the little prince added: ÿBut the eyes are blind. One must look with the heart...ÿ 

I had drunk the water. I breathed easily. At sunrise the sand is the colour of honey. And that 
honey colour was making me happy, too. What brought me, then, this sense of grief? 

ÿYou must keep your promise,ÿ said the little prince, softly, as he sat down beside me once more. 
ÿWhat promise?ÿ ÿYou know, a muzzle for my sheep... I am responsible for this flower...ÿ 

I took my rough drafts of drawings out of my pocket. The little prince looked them over, and 
laughed as he said: 

ÿYour baobabs, they look a little like cabbages.ÿ 

ÿOh!ÿ I had been so proud of my baobabs! ÿYour fox, his ears look a little like horns; and they are 
too long.ÿ And he laughed again. 

ÿYou are not fair, little prince,ÿ I said. ÿI donÿt know how to draw anything except boa constrictors 
from the outside and boa constrictors from the inside.ÿ 





ÿOh, that will be all right,ÿ he said, ÿchildren understand.ÿ 

So then I made a pencil sketch of a muzzle. And as I gave it to him my heart was torn. 

ÿYou have plans that I do not know about,ÿ I said. But he did not answer me. He said to me, 
instead: ÿYou know, my descent to the earth... Tomorrow will be its anniversary.ÿ Then, after a 
silence, he went on: ÿI came down very near here.ÿ And he flushed. 

And once again, without understanding why, I had a queer sense of sorrow. One question, 
however, occurred to me: ÿThen it was not by chance that on the morning when I first met you ÿ a 
week ago ÿ you were strolling along like that, all alone, a thousand miles from any inhabited 
region? You were on the your way back to the place where you landed?ÿ 

The little prince flushed again. And I added, with some hesitancy: ÿPerhaps it was because of the 
anniversary?ÿ The little prince flushed once more. He never answered questions, but when one 
flushes does that not mean ÿYesÿ? 

ÿAh,ÿ I said to him, ÿI am a little frightened...ÿ 

But he interrupted me. ÿNow you must work. You must return to your engine. I will be waiting for 
you here. Come back tomorrow evening...ÿ 

But I was not reassured. I remembered the fox. One runs the risk of weeping a little, if one lets 
himself be tamed... 

Beside the well there was the ruin of an old stone wall. When I came back from my work, the next 
evening, I saw from some distance away my little prince sitting on top of a wall, with his feet 
dangling. And I heard him say: ÿThen you donÿt remember. This is not the exact spot.ÿ Another 
voice must have answered him, for he replied to it: ÿYes, yes! It is the right day, but this is not the 
place.ÿ 

I continued my walk toward the wall. At no time did I see or hear anyone. The little prince, 
however, replied once again: ÿ...Exactly. You will see where my track begins, in the sand. You have 
nothing to do but wait for me there. I shall be there tonight.ÿ 



I was only twenty metres from the wall, and I still saw nothing. After a silence the little prince 
spoke again: ÿYou have good poison? You are sure that it will not make me suffer too long?ÿ I 
stopped in my tracks, my heart torn asunder; but still I did not understand. ÿNow go away,ÿ said 
the little prince. ÿI want to get down from the wall.ÿ 

I dropped my eyes, then, to the foot of the wall... and I leaped into the air. There before me, facing 
the little prince, was one of those yellow snakes that take just thirty seconds to bring your life to 
an end. Even as I was digging into my pocked to get out my revolver I made a running step back. 
But, at the noise I made, the snake let himself flow easily across the sand like the dying spray of 
a fountain, and, in no apparent hurry, disappeared, with a light metallic sound, among the stones. I 
reached the wall just in time to catch my little man in my arms; his face was white as snow. 

ÿWhat does this mean?ÿ I demanded. ÿWhy are you talking with snakes?ÿ 

I had loosened the golden muffler that he always wore. I had moistened his temples, and had 
given him some water to drink. And now I did not dare ask him any more questions. He looked at 
me very gravely, and put his arms around my neck. I felt his heart beating like the heart of a 
dying bird, shot with someoneÿs rifle... 

ÿI am glad that you have found what was the matter with your engine,ÿ he said. ÿNow you can go 
back homeÿ 

ÿHow do you know about that?ÿ I was just coming to tell him that my work had been successful, 
beyond anything that I had dared to hope. 

He made no answer to my question, but he added: ÿI, too, am going back home today...ÿ Then, 
sadly, ÿIt is much farther... it is much more difficult...ÿ I realised clearly that something 
extraordinary was happening. I was holding him close in my arms as if he were a little child; and 
yet it seemed to me that he was rushing headlong toward an abyss from which I could do nothing 
to restrain him... His look was very serious, like some one lost far away. 

ÿI have your sheep. And I have the sheepÿs box. And I have the muzzle...ÿ 

And he gave me a sad smile. I waited a long time. I could see that he was reviving little by little. 

ÿDear little man,ÿ I said to him, ÿyou are afraid...ÿ He was afraid, there was no doubt about that. 
But he laughed lightly. 

ÿI shall be much more afraid this evening...ÿ 

Once again I felt myself frozen by the sense of something irreparable. And I knew that I could not 
bear the thought of never hearing that laughter any more. For me, it was like a spring of fresh 
water in the desert. 

ÿLittle man,ÿ I said, ÿI want to hear you laugh again.ÿ But he said to me: ÿTonight, it will be a 
year... my star, then, can be found right above the place where I came to the Earth, a year ago...ÿ 

ÿLittle man,ÿ I said, ÿtell me that it is only a bad dream, this affair of the snake, and the meeting- 
place, and the star...ÿ But he did not answer my plea. 

He said to me, instead: ÿThe thing that is important is the thing that is not seen...ÿ ÿYes, I 
know...ÿ 




ÿIt is just as it is with the flower. If you love a flower that lives on a star, it is sweet to look at the 
sky at night. All the stars are a-bloom with flowers...ÿ 

ÿYes, I know...ÿ 

ÿIt is just as it is with the water. Because of the pulley, and the rope, what you gave me to drink 
was like music. You remember, how good it was.ÿ 

ÿYes, I know...ÿ 

ÿAnd at night you will look up at the stars. Where I live everything is so small that I cannot show 
you where my star is to be found. It is better, like that. My star will just be one of the stars, for 
you. And so you will love to watch all the stars in the heavens... they will all be your friends. And, 
besides, I am going to make you a present...ÿ He laughed again. 

ÿAh, little prince, dear little prince! I love to hear that laughter!ÿ 

ÿThat is my present. Just that. It will be as it was when we drank the water...ÿ 

ÿWhat are you trying to say?ÿ 

ÿAll men have the stars,ÿ he answered, ÿbut they are not the same things for different people. For 
some, who are travellers, the stars are guides. For others they are no more than little lights in the 
sky. For others, who are scholars, they are problems. For my businessman they were wealth. But 
all these stars are silent. You, you alone, will have the stars as no one else has themÿ 

ÿWhat are you trying to say?ÿ 

ÿIn one of the stars I shall be living. In one of them I shall be laughing. And so it will be as if all 
the stars were laughing, when you look at the sky at night... you, only you, will have stars that can 
laugh!ÿ 

And he laughed again. ÿAnd when your sorrow is comforted (time soothes all sorrows) you will be 
content that you have known me. You will always be my friend. You will want to laugh with me. And 
you will sometimes open your window, so, for that pleasure... and your friends will be properly 
astonished to see you laughing as you look up at the sky! Then you will say to them, ÿYes, the 
stars always make me laugh!ÿ And they will think you are crazy. It will be a very shabby trick that 
I shall have played on you...ÿ 

And he laughed again. ÿIt will be as if, in place of the stars, I had given you a great number of 
little bells that knew how to laugh...ÿ 

And he laughed again. Then he quickly became serious: ÿTonight, you know... do not come,ÿ said 
the little prince. 

ÿI shall not leave you,ÿ I said. 

ÿI shall look as if I were suffering. I shall look a little as if I were dying. It is like that. Do not 
come to see that. It is not worth the trouble...ÿ 

ÿI shall not leave you.ÿ 



But he was worried. ÿI tell you, it is also because of the snake. He must not bite you. Snakes, they 




are malicious creatures. This one might bite you just for fun...ÿ 



ÿI shall not leave you.ÿ 

But a thought came to reassure him: ÿIt is true that they have no more poison for a second bite.ÿ 

That night I did not see him set out on his way. He got away from me without making a sound. 
When I succeeded in catching up with him he was walking along with a quick and resolute step. He 
said to me merely: ÿAh! You are there...ÿ And he took me by the hand. But he was still worrying. 
ÿIt was wrong of you to come. You will suffer. I shall look as if I were dead; and that will not be 
true...ÿ 

I said nothing. 

ÿYou understand... it is too far. I cannot carry this body with me. It is too heavy.ÿ 

I said nothing. 

ÿBut it will be like an old abandoned shell. There is nothing sad about old shells...ÿ 

I said nothing. He was a little discouraged. But he made one more effort: ÿYou know, it will be 
very nice. I, too, shall look at the stars. All the stars will be wells with a rusty pulley. All the stars 
will pour out fresh water for me to drink...ÿ 

I said nothing. 

ÿThat will be so amusing! You will have five hundred million little bells, and I shall have five 
hundred million springs of fresh water...ÿ And he too said nothing more, because he was crying... 

ÿHere it is. Let me go on by myself.ÿ And he sat down, because he was afraid. Then he said, 
again: ÿYou know, my flower... I am responsible for her. And she is so weak! She has four thorns, 
of no use at all, to protect herself against all the world...ÿ 

I too sat down, because I was not able to stand up any longer. ÿThere now, that is all...ÿ 

He still hesitated a little; then he got up. He took one step. I could not move. There was nothing 
but a flash of yellow close to his ankle. He remained motionless for an instant. He did not cry out. 
He fell as gently as a tree falls. There was not even any sound, because of the sand. 

And now six years have already gone by... I have never yet told this story. 

The companions who met me on my return were well content to see me alive. I was sad, but I told 
them: ÿI am tired.ÿ Now my sorrow is comforted a little. That is to say, not entirely. But I know 
that he did go back to his planet, because I did not find his body at daybreak. It was not such a 
heavy body... and at night I love to listen to the stars. It is like five hundred million little bells... 
But there is one extraordinary thing... when I drew the muzzle for the little prince, I forgot to add 
the leather strap to it. He will never have been able to fasten it on his sheep. 

So now I keep wondering: what is happening on his planet? Perhaps the sheep has eaten the 
flower... At one time I say to myself: ÿSurely not! The little prince shuts his flower under her glass 
globe every night, and he watches over his sheep very carefully...ÿ Then I am happy. And there is 
sweetness in the laughter of all the stars. 




But at another time I say to myself: ÿAt some moment or other one is absent-minded, and that is 
enough! On some one evening he forgot the glass globe, or the sheep got out, without making any 
noise, in the night...ÿ And then the little bells are changed to tears... Here, then, is a great 
mystery. 

For you who also love the little prince, and for me, nothing in the universe can be the same if 
somewhere, we do not know where, a sheep that we never saw has eaten a rose... Look up at the 
sky. Ask yourselves: is it yes or no? 

Has the sheep eaten the flower? And you will see how everything changes... And no grown-up will 
ever understand that this is a matter of so much importance! This is, to me, the loveliest and 
saddest landscape in the world. It is the same as that on the preceding page, but I have drawn it 
again to impress it on your memory. It is here that the little prince appeared on Earth, and 
disappeared. Look at it carefully so that you will be sure to recognise it in case you travel some 
day to the African desert. And, if you should come upon this spot, please do not hurry on. Wait for 
a time, exactly under the star. Then, if a little man appears who laughs, who has golden hair and 
who refuses to answer questions, you will know who he is. If this should happen, please comfort 
me. Send me word that he has come back. 



END
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             